Move Collector architecture documentation and diagrams from Github to opentelemetry.io (#4029)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/architecture.md

---
title: Architecture
weight: 28
# prettier-ignore

> cSpell:ignore: # TODO: Add keywords to ignore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cSpell:ignore: fanoutconsumer probabilisticsampler spanmetrics zpages
```

this will satisfy the cspell checks

Author: Thanks. Is this something I could have tested on my own or is that part of CI only available to maintainers?

Reviewer: yes, with `npm run check:spelling`

more protocols.

Data receiving, processing, and exporting are done using
[Pipelines](#pipelines). The Collector can be configured to have one or more
pipelines. Each pipeline includes the following:

- A set of [Receivers](#receivers) that receive the data.
- A series of optional [Processors](#processors) that get the data from
  receivers and process it.
- A set of [Exporters](#exporters) which get the data from processors and send
  it outside the Collector.

The same receiver can be included in multiple pipelines and multiple pipelines
can include the same exporter.

## Pipelines

A pipeline defines a path that data follows in the Collector: from reception, to
processing (or modification), and finally to export.

Pipelines can operate on three telemetry data types: traces, metrics, and logs.
The data type is a property of the pipeline defined by its configuration.
Receivers, processors, and exporters used in a pipeline must support the
particular data type otherwise `ErrDataTypeIsNotSupported` will be reported when
the configuration is loaded. A pipeline can be depicted the following way:

```mermaid
---

> title: Pipeline

Author: This is the first of six Mermaid diagrams. Mermaid doesn't allow for floating edges, so I've left off the ellipses from the [original diagram](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/images/design-pipelines.png). Hopefully doing so doesn't change the meaning too much.

---
flowchart LR
    A(Receiver 1) --> D[Processor 1]

>     B(Receiver 2) --> D
>     C(Receiver N) --> D

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    B(Receiver 2) --> D
    X(...) --> D
    C(Receiver N) --> D
```

like this?

Author: LGTM. I will add the rest of the ellipses to this diagram and use the same format for the other diagrams as well.

Author: I followed the spirit of this suggestion, but I renamed the IDs to be a little more representative, so I'm not committing the change.

    D --> E[Processor 2]
    E --> F[Processor N]
    F --> G((fan out))
    G --> H[[Exporter 1]]
    G --> I[[Exporter 2]]
    G --> J[[Exporter N]]

    classDef default fill:#e3e8fc,stroke:#4f62ad 
```

Pipelines can have one or more receivers. Data from all receivers is pushed to
the first processor, which processes the data and then pushes it to the next
processor (or a processor may drop the data if it is a “sampling” processor, for
example), and so on until the last processor in the pipeline pushes the data to
the exporters. Each exporter gets a copy of each data element. The last
processor uses a `fanoutconsumer` to fan out the data to multiple exporters.

The pipeline is constructed during Collector startup based on pipeline
definition in the configuration.

A pipeline configuration typically looks like this:

```yaml
service:
  pipelines: # section that can contain multiple subsections, one per pipeline
    traces: # type of the pipeline

>       receivers: [otlp, jaeger, zipkin]
>       processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
>       exporters: [otlp, jaeger, zipkin]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      receivers: [otlp, zipkin]
      processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
      exporters: [otlp, zipkin]
```

`jaeger` is deprecated since there is native OTLP support, so we might consider removing them here.

```

> The above example defines a pipeline for the “traces” type of telemetry data,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example defines a pipeline for the traces type of telemetry data,
```

with three receivers, two processors, and three exporters.

For details of config file format see

> [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NeheFG7DmcUYo_h2vLtNRlia9x5wOJMlV4QKEK05FhQ/edit#).

Reviewer: why is this in a google doc and not in a markdown file in the collector repo? I guess this has historical reasons, maybe we can migrate it as well?

Author: I'm not sure about the document's origin, but I'm happy to convert it to Markdown and move it to the Collector repo if that's the consensus.

Reviewer: Good question where this should live, this is up to the @open-telemetry/collector-approvers

Author: Removed in 2740396. Thanks!

### Receivers

Receivers typically listen on a network port and receive telemetry data. Usually
one receiver is configured to send received data to one pipeline. However, it is
also possible to configure the same receiver to send the same received data to
multiple pipelines. This can be done by listing the same receiver in the
“receivers” key of several pipelines:

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
        endpoint: localhost:4317

service:
  pipelines:
    traces: # a pipeline of “traces” type
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
      exporters: [jaeger]
    traces/2: # another pipeline of “traces” type
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]

>       exporters: [opencensus]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      exporters: [otlp]
```

```

In the above example, `otlp` receiver will send the same data to pipeline
`traces` and to pipeline `traces/2`. (Note: The configuration uses composite key
names in the form of `type[/name]` as defined in
[this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NeheFG7DmcUYo_h2vLtNRlia9x5wOJMlV4QKEK05FhQ/edit#)).

When the Collector loads this config, the result will look like this diagram
(part of processors and exporters are omitted for brevity):

<!--TODO: Add Receivers image via Mermaid.-->

> > Important: When the same receiver is referenced in more than one pipeline, the
> > Collector creates only one receiver instance at runtime that sends the data to
> > a fan out consumer. The fan out consumer in turn sends the data to the first
> > processor of each pipeline. The data propagation from receiver to the fan out
> > consumer and then to processors is completed using a synchronous function
> > call. This means that if one processor blocks the call, the other pipelines
> > attached to this receiver are blocked from receiving the same data, and the
> > receiver itself stops processing and forwarding newly received data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{{% alert title="Important" color="warning" %}}
 
When the same receiver is referenced in more than one pipeline, the
Collector creates only one receiver instance at runtime that sends the data to
a fan out consumer. The fan out consumer in turn sends the data to the first
processor of each pipeline. The data propagation from receiver to the fan out
consumer and then to processors is completed using a synchronous function
call. This means that if one processor blocks the call, the other pipelines
attached to this receiver are blocked from receiving the same data, and the
receiver itself stops processing and forwarding newly received data.

{{% /alert %}}

```

### Exporters

Exporters typically forward the data they get to a destination on a network, but

> they can also send the data elsewhere. For example, `logging` exporter writes

Reviewer: The `logging` exporter has been deprecated and replaced with the `debug` exporter

---
title: Architecture
weight: 28
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: fanoutconsumer probabilisticsampler spanmetrics zpages
---

> OpenTelemetry Collector is an executable that can receive telemetry data,
> optionally process it, and export it further.
> 
> The Collector supports several popular open source protocols for receiving and
> sending telemetry data as well as offering a pluggable architecture for adding
> more protocols.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Collector is an executable file that can receive telemetry,
process it, and export it to multiple targets, such as observability backends.

The Collector supports several popular open source protocols for receiving and
sending telemetry data, and it offers an extensible architecture for adding
more protocols.
```

> Data receiving, processing, and exporting are done using
> [Pipelines](#pipelines). The Collector can be configured to have one or more
> pipelines. Each pipeline includes the following:
> 
> - A set of [Receivers](#receivers) that receive the data.
> - A series of optional [Processors](#processors) that get the data from
>   receivers and process it.
> - A set of [Exporters](#exporters) which get the data from processors and send
>   it outside the Collector.
> 
> The same receiver can be included in multiple pipelines and multiple pipelines
> can include the same exporter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data receiving, processing, and exporting are done using
[pipelines](#pipelines). You can configure the Collector to
have one or more pipelines.

Each pipeline includes the following:

- A set of [receivers](#receivers) that collect the data.
- A series of optional [processors](#processors) that get the data from
  receivers and process it.
- A set of [exporters](#exporters) which get the data from processors and send
  it outside the Collector.

The same receiver can be included in multiple pipelines and multiple pipelines
can include the same exporter.
```

## Pipelines

A pipeline defines a path that data follows in the Collector: from reception, to
processing (or modification), and finally to export.

Pipelines can operate on three telemetry data types: traces, metrics, and logs.
The data type is a property of the pipeline defined by its configuration.
Receivers, processors, and exporters used in a pipeline must support the

> particular data type otherwise `ErrDataTypeIsNotSupported` will be reported when
> the configuration is loaded. A pipeline can be depicted the following way:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
particular data type, otherwise the `ErrDataTypeIsNotSupported` exception
is reported when the configuration loads.

The following diagram represents a typical pipeline:
```

```mermaid
---
title: Pipeline
---
flowchart LR
    R1(Receiver 1) --> P1[Processor 1]
    R2(Receiver 2) --> P1
    RM(...) ~~~ P1
    RN(Receiver N) --> P1
    P1 --> P2[Processor 2]
    P2 --> PM[...]
    PM --> PN[Processor N]
    PN --> FO((fan out))
    FO --> E1[[Exporter 1]]
    FO --> E2[[Exporter 2]]
    FO ~~~ EM[[...]]
    FO --> EN[[Exporter N]]

    %% The stroke color matches the website header.
    classDef default fill:#e3e8fc,stroke:#4f62ad
```

> Pipelines can have one or more receivers. Data from all receivers is pushed to
> the first processor, which processes the data and then pushes it to the next
> processor (or a processor may drop the data if it is a “sampling” processor, for
> example), and so on until the last processor in the pipeline pushes the data to
> the exporters. Each exporter gets a copy of each data element. The last
> processor uses a `fanoutconsumer` to fan out the data to multiple exporters.
> 
> The pipeline is constructed during Collector startup based on pipeline
> definition in the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pipelines can have one or more receivers. Data from all receivers is pushed to
the first processor, which processes the data and then pushes it to the next
processor. A processor might also drop the data if it's sampling or filtering.
This continues until the last processor in the pipeline pushes the data to
the exporters. Each exporter gets a copy of each data element. The last
processor uses a `fanoutconsumer` to send the data to multiple exporters.

The pipeline is constructed during Collector startup based on pipeline
definition in the configuration.
```

A pipeline configuration typically looks like this:

```yaml
service:
  pipelines: # section that can contain multiple subsections, one per pipeline
    traces: # type of the pipeline
      receivers: [otlp, zipkin]
      processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
      exporters: [otlp, zipkin]
```

> The above example defines a pipeline for the traces type of telemetry data,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous example defines a pipeline for the traces type of telemetry data,
```

with three receivers, two processors, and three exporters.

For details of config file format see
[this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NeheFG7DmcUYo_h2vLtNRlia9x5wOJMlV4QKEK05FhQ/edit#).

### Receivers

Receivers typically listen on a network port and receive telemetry data. Usually
one receiver is configured to send received data to one pipeline. However, it is
also possible to configure the same receiver to send the same received data to
multiple pipelines. This can be done by listing the same receiver in the
“receivers” key of several pipelines:

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
        endpoint: localhost:4317

service:
  pipelines:
    traces: # a pipeline of “traces” type
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [memory_limiter, batch]

>       exporters: [jaeger]

Author: I count 11 more mentions of jaeger in the document, including several in diagrams (two of which I'm still working on).

Reviewer: We do not need to remove all of them, only the instances where the jaeger exporter is used since it has been deprecated a while ago already, the receivers are still fine, but we still could consider using OTLP there. Jaeger can remain if named as a potential backend (which now supports OTLP)

Author: I changed mentions of jaeger exporter to otlp in 8e12f26.

    traces/2: # another pipeline of “traces” type
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
```

In the above example, `otlp` receiver will send the same data to pipeline
`traces` and to pipeline `traces/2`. (Note: The configuration uses composite key
names in the form of `type[/name]` as defined in

> [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NeheFG7DmcUYo_h2vLtNRlia9x5wOJMlV4QKEK05FhQ/edit#)).

Reviewer 2: Could you turn this into a callout?

Author: Great idea. Thanks!

When the Collector loads this config, the result will look like this diagram
(part of processors and exporters are omitted for brevity):

<!--TODO: Add Receivers image via Mermaid.-->

{{% alert title="Important" color="warning" %}}
 
When the same receiver is referenced in more than one pipeline, the
Collector creates only one receiver instance at runtime that sends the data to

> a fan out consumer. The fan out consumer in turn sends the data to the first

Author: I'm not the original author, so I wasn't sure what "fan out" means either. I read through the processor README and found it [mentioned there](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/4ae8d2bcd5ae2e72280fb6af7e9402b7b6e7c6cb/processor/README.md?plain=1#L45) as well. From a [quick web search](https://www.google.com/search?q=fan-out+connector+software&sca_esv=59bcec2abd4eef4d&ei=NQzdZcfZEr22wN4Px-qMwAs&ved=0ahUKEwiHyKHcgsqEAxU9G9AFHUc1A7gQ4dUDCBA&uact=5&oq=fan-out+connector+software&gs_lp=Egxnd3Mtd2l6LXNlcnAiGmZhbi1vdXQgY29ubmVjdG9yIHNvZnR3YXJlMgUQIRigATIFECEYoAFIsxRQzwZYvhJwAXgBkAEAmAGdAaAB6QmqAQMwLjm4AQPIAQD4AQGYAgqgAo8KwgIKEAAYRxjWBBiwA8ICBhAAGBYYHsICCBAAGBYYHhgPwgILEAAYgAQYigUYhgOYAwCIBgGQBgiSBwMxLjk&sclient=gws-wiz-serp), "fan-out" seems like a recognized term for a software concept. 

I will add the hyphen. I can also write a parenthetical definition to include in the documentation, but it would be good to have an SME check it over. I'll tag one of the Collector folks once I've pushed the changes.

> a fan out consumer. The fan out consumer in turn sends the data to the first

Reviewer: Let's leave that wording as is. I agree with @theletterf that not everyone would know what "fan out" means, but we are taking the original document over, so I don't think we should change this right now

   in native languages.
2. In some programming languages (for example, Ruby or PHP), it is difficult to
   do the stats aggregation in process.
3. To enable exporting of OpenTelemetry spans, stats, or metrics, application
   users need to manually add library exporters and redeploy their binaries.
   This is especially difficult when an incident has occurred, and users want to
   use OpenTelemetry to investigate the issue right away.
4. Application users need to take the responsibility for configuring and
   initializing exporters. These tasks are error-prone (for example, setting up
   incorrect credentials or monitored resources), and users may be reluctant to
   “pollute” their code with OpenTelemetry.

To resolve the issues above, you can run OpenTelemetry Collector as an Agent.
The Agent runs as a daemon in the VM/container and can be deployed independent
of Library. Once Agent is deployed and running, it should be able to retrieve
traces, metrics, and logs from Library, and export them to other backends. We
may also give Agent the ability to push configurations (such as sampling
probability) to Library. For those languages that cannot do stats aggregation in

> process, they can send raw measurements and have Agent do the aggregation.

Author: I addressed this in 1b7117e.

   do the stats aggregation in process.
3. To enable exporting of OpenTelemetry spans, stats, or metrics, application
   users need to manually add library exporters and redeploy their binaries.
   This is especially difficult when an incident has occurred, and users want to
   use OpenTelemetry to investigate the issue right away.
4. Application users need to take the responsibility for configuring and
   initializing exporters. These tasks are error-prone (for example, setting up
   incorrect credentials or monitored resources), and users may be reluctant to
   “pollute” their code with OpenTelemetry.

To resolve the issues above, you can run OpenTelemetry Collector as an agent.
The agent runs as a daemon in the VM/container and can be deployed independent
of the library. Once the agent is deployed and running, it should be able to
retrieve traces, metrics, and logs from the library, and export them to other
backends. We may also give the agent the ability to push configurations (such as
sampling probability) to the library. For those languages that cannot do stats
aggregation in process, they can send raw measurements and have the agent do the
aggregation.

> ```mermaid

Author: May I have your thoughts on this Mermaid diagram? 

Mermaid's algorithm makes it surprisingly difficult to keep nodes in order. The workaround is subgraphs, but some may find the resulting boxes too messy for this diagram. Before I go on to the final diagram, which has a similar issue, I'd like to hear your thoughts. Thanks!

Author: I neutralized some of the subgraph formatting in 677af81. I think it looks better now but would still like to hear others' opinions.

Reviewer 2: Considering Mermaid's limitations, the diagram looks great to me!

with three receivers, two processors, and three exporters.

For details of config file format see
[this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NeheFG7DmcUYo_h2vLtNRlia9x5wOJMlV4QKEK05FhQ/edit#).

### Receivers

Receivers typically listen on a network port and receive telemetry data. Usually
one receiver is configured to send received data to one pipeline. However, it is
also possible to configure the same receiver to send the same received data to
multiple pipelines. This can be done by listing the same receiver in the
`receivers` key of several pipelines:

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
        endpoint: localhost:4317

service:
  pipelines:
    traces: # a pipeline of “traces” type
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
    traces/2: # another pipeline of “traces” type
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [otlp]
```

In the above example, `otlp` receiver will send the same data to pipeline
`traces` and to pipeline `traces/2`.

> The configuration uses composite key names in the form of `type[/name]` as
> defined in

> > [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NeheFG7DmcUYo_h2vLtNRlia9x5wOJMlV4QKEK05FhQ/edit#)).

Author: I've removed mention of the file (2740396) but left the config explanation.

When the Collector loads this config, the result looks like this diagram (part
of processors and exporters are omitted for brevity):

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    R1("`#quot;opentelemetry-collector#quot; Receiver`") --> FO((fan-out))
    FO -->|Pipeline 'traces'| P1["`#quot;memory_limiter#quot; Processor`"]

>     FO -->|Pipeline 'traces/2'| P2["`#quot;tags#quot; Processor`"]

Author: The 'tags' processor is mentioned in two diagrams from the [original document](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/design.md): the [receiver diagram](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/images/design-receivers.png) and the [exporter diagram](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/docs/images/design-exporters.png).

I've recreated them as Mermaid diagrams, so we can make changes easily if the 'tags' processor is no longer valid or relevant.

>     FO -->|Pipeline 'traces/2'| P2["`#quot;tags#quot; Processor`"]

Reviewer 3: I don't remember about that processor, and I would expect this diagram to be related to the config that was shared in the previous example.

>     FO -->|Pipeline 'traces/2'| P2["`#quot;tags#quot; Processor`"]

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can say 'transform' instead of tags here?

>     FO -->|Pipeline 'traces/2'| P2["`#quot;tags#quot; Processor`"]

Reviewer 3: The collector config coming right before this would need to be updated as well. I believe this diagram here is a representation of that config.

>     FO -->|Pipeline 'traces/2'| P2["`#quot;tags#quot; Processor`"]

Author: Updated configs and diagrams to replace `tags` with `transform`: ff7579f.
